src/pages/about.md, before:

---
layout: ../layouts/AboutLayout.astro
title: "About Me"
---

> Check out my resume [here](https://github.com/sajal2692/resume/blob/main/resume.pdf).

## 🌟 Professional Overview

I'm an AI Engineer and Technology Leader passionate about building cutting-edge Generative AI, Machine Learning, and Natural Language Processing systems.

With over eight years of experience in product development and consulting across various industries, I've worked on AI-driven solutions that push the boundaries of what's possible. Currently, I’m part of **Menyala, a venture studio backed by Temasek** in Singapore, where I focus on developing AI-powered ventures designed to transform industries.

Here's a bit more about my professional milestones:

- **AI Engineer / Technologist at Menyala (Temasek-backed Venture Studio in Singapore)**: My role involves architecting AI-first products, developing scalable systems, shaping technology strategy with product and business teams, and consulting on AI strategy across Menyala’s ventures.
- **Lead AI Engineer at OneByZero**: Led a team of 6, building AI solutions across telecom, marketing, and enterprise ventures, including RAG systems, AI agents, and image generation for product marketing. Designed and deployed scalable AI architectures, advancing Generative AI applications in real-world use cases.
- **Senior AI Engineer at Splore, a Temasek-backed startup**: Enhanced AI-driven search by refining ranking algorithms and fine-tuning embedding models to improve relevance and user experience. My work combined Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) with core NLP techniques to create a more intuitive and intelligent search system.
- **Journey at Unscrambl India, from Data Scientist to Senior Machine Learning Engineer**: Built and deployed pre-GPT chatbots using traditional NLP—serving tens of thousands of users daily across Southeast Asia. Played a key role in core product innovation by developing advanced NL2SQL systems, enabling seamless natural language interactions with databases and enhancing Business Intelligence capabilities.

## 🌱 Beyond the Workspace

- **Instructor at O’Reilly (2025)**: Created and taught "[Building AI Agents with LangGraph](https://learning.oreilly.com/course/building-ai-agents/0642572077884/)", a 3 hour video course offering a hands-on introduction to developing AI agents with Python, OpenAI, and LangGraph. The course covers core AI agent concepts, multi-agent architectures, and essential design patterns for building agentic systems.
- **Guest Lecturer at Yale University (2025)**: Delivered a guest lecture on "Building Agentic Systems with LangGraph" in MGT 899: Generative AI & Entrepreneurship, exploring how entrepreneurs can leverage graph-based AI workflows to build the next generation of AI-driven products.
- **Mentorship at Udacity (2017 - 2023)**: As a mentor for Udacity's Machine Learning and Data Science courses, I provided guidance to students in form of technical support as well as code reviews, helping them navigate complex machine learning and AI concepts. Over the years, I reviewed more than 1,000 projects and was consistently rated an A+ mentor by Udacity's internal audit team for my contributions.
- **Mentorship at the University of Melbourne (2020 - 2023)**: As part of the university's STEM Mentorship Program, I supported students in their journey through technology and AI, offering career advice and technical insights.
- **Data Science Portfolio on GitHub**: Open-source repository of classical Data Science projects with more than 1000 stars. Find it [here](https://github.com/sajal2692/data-science-portfolio).

## 🎓 Academic Background

- Master of Information Technology from the University of Melbourne.
- Bachelor of Computer Applications from Bharatiya Vidyapeeth University.

## 🤝 Let's Connect!

Got an idea? A project? Or just wanna talk about the coolest AI trends over coffee (virtual or real)?

Hit me up! You can find me on [LinkedIn](https://linkedin.com/in/sajals), or drop me an email at contact@sajalsharma.com.

_Thanks for swinging by!_

Commit message:

feat: add 2026 Yale guest lecture on agent harness
Update Yale guest lecturer section to include both 2025 and 2026 lectures with details on the transition from agentic workflows to agent harness frameworks.

src/pages/about.md, after:

---
layout: ../layouts/AboutLayout.astro
title: "About Me"
---

> Check out my resume [here](https://github.com/sajal2692/resume/blob/main/resume.pdf).

## 🌟 Professional Overview

I'm an AI Engineer and Technology Leader passionate about building cutting-edge Generative AI, Machine Learning, and Natural Language Processing systems.

With over eight years of experience in product development and consulting across various industries, I've worked on AI-driven solutions that push the boundaries of what's possible. Currently, I’m part of **Menyala, a venture studio backed by Temasek** in Singapore, where I focus on developing AI-powered ventures designed to transform industries.

Here's a bit more about my professional milestones:

- **AI Engineer / Technologist at Menyala (Temasek-backed Venture Studio in Singapore)**: My role involves architecting AI-first products, developing scalable systems, shaping technology strategy with product and business teams, and consulting on AI strategy across Menyala’s ventures.
- **Lead AI Engineer at OneByZero**: Led a team of 6, building AI solutions across telecom, marketing, and enterprise ventures, including RAG systems, AI agents, and image generation for product marketing. Designed and deployed scalable AI architectures, advancing Generative AI applications in real-world use cases.
- **Senior AI Engineer at Splore, a Temasek-backed startup**: Enhanced AI-driven search by refining ranking algorithms and fine-tuning embedding models to improve relevance and user experience. My work combined Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) with core NLP techniques to create a more intuitive and intelligent search system.
- **Journey at Unscrambl India, from Data Scientist to Senior Machine Learning Engineer**: Built and deployed pre-GPT chatbots using traditional NLP—serving tens of thousands of users daily across Southeast Asia. Played a key role in core product innovation by developing advanced NL2SQL systems, enabling seamless natural language interactions with databases and enhancing Business Intelligence capabilities.

## 🌱 Beyond the Workspace

- **Instructor at O’Reilly (2025)**: Created and taught "[Building AI Agents with LangGraph](https://learning.oreilly.com/course/building-ai-agents/0642572077884/)", a 3 hour video course offering a hands-on introduction to developing AI agents with Python, OpenAI, and LangGraph. The course covers core AI agent concepts, multi-agent architectures, and essential design patterns for building agentic systems.
- **Guest Lecturer at Yale University (2025-2026)**: Delivered guest lectures in MGT 899: Generative AI & Entrepreneurship, sharing insights on the evolution of AI systems with entrepreneurs.
  - **2025**: "Building Agentic Systems with LangGraph" - Explored how entrepreneurs can leverage graph-based AI workflows to build the next generation of AI-driven products.
  - **2026**: "From Agentic Workflows to Agent Harness" - Examined the architectural transition from agentic workflows to agent harness frameworks and its transformative effect on AI application development.
- **Mentorship at Udacity (2017 - 2023)**: As a mentor for Udacity's Machine Learning and Data Science courses, I provided guidance to students in form of technical support as well as code reviews, helping them navigate complex machine learning and AI concepts. Over the years, I reviewed more than 1,000 projects and was consistently rated an A+ mentor by Udacity's internal audit team for my contributions.
- **Mentorship at the University of Melbourne (2020 - 2023)**: As part of the university's STEM Mentorship Program, I supported students in their journey through technology and AI, offering career advice and technical insights.
- **Data Science Portfolio on GitHub**: Open-source repository of classical Data Science projects with more than 1000 stars. Find it [here](https://github.com/sajal2692/data-science-portfolio).

## 🎓 Academic Background

- Master of Information Technology from the University of Melbourne.
- Bachelor of Computer Applications from Bharatiya Vidyapeeth University.

## 🤝 Let's Connect!

Got an idea? A project? Or just wanna talk about the coolest AI trends over coffee (virtual or real)?

Hit me up! You can find me on [LinkedIn](https://linkedin.com/in/sajals), or drop me an email at contact@sajalsharma.com.

_Thanks for swinging by!_
